# Leibniz

But if we were to attribute an inherent force to our mind, a force for producing immanent actions, or to put it another way, a force for acting immanently, then nothing forbids, in fact, it is reasonable to suppose that the same force would be found in other souls or forms, or, if you prefer, in the natures of substances—unless someone were to think that, in the natural world accessible to us, our minds alone are active, or that all power for acting immanently, and further, as I put it, all power for acting vitally is joined to an intellect, assertions that are neither con-firmed by any rational arguments, nor can they be defended except by distorting the truth. (G IV, p. 510; AG, p. 161)

## Medicina

Defensor de la teoría cartesiana de que el cuerpo es meramente una máquina:

>It is clear that the human body is a machine determined to certain functions by its author or inventor. Thus to write medicine is nothing other than to prescribe a method to a given mechanic who is able to conserve the machine that has been entrusted to him, so that it will always operate correctly.

Leibniz a Bouvet en 1697: 

>Medicine is the most necessary of the natural sciences. For just as theology is the summit of the knowledge of things pertaining to spirit, and just as it contains both good morals and good politics, one can say that medicine as well is the summit and as it were the principal fruit of our knowledge of bodies, to the extent that they are related to our own. But all of physical science and medicine itself have as their final goal the glory of God and the supreme happiness of men, for in conserving them, medicine gives them the means to work for the glory of God.

Leibniz's eventual conception of the harmony between body and soul is ultimately rooted in precisely this perceived parallelism between medicine and theology. By his own account, Leibniz's single greatest innovation is the doctrine of preestablished harmony, according to which bodies and souls (as well as all the infinitely many monads) unfold according to their own laws, while still noncausally coexisting with one another in a perfectly rational order. Correlatively, while each science has its own subject matter, medicine and theology (or the subdivision of theology that Leibniz sometimes calls "pneumatics," that is, the study of immaterial beings) both seek to offer accounts of one and the same order under different descriptions, pneumatics focusing upon the unfolding of the states of souls according to their laws, and medicine, in the very broadest sense, focusing upon the unfolding of the states of bodies according to theirs. Of course, for us medicine is something rather narrower than the study of living bodies, let alone of bodies in general. But it is important to bear in mind, first of all, that for Leibniz the homologies between animal and human bodies make the study of the former just as central to medicine as the study of the latter; and, second of all, that for him, in the end, every body may be understood on the model of animal bodies. Understood in this light, medicine is very fundamental indeed. Medicine is also crucial because it alone provides the hope for keeping the bodies.

Indeed, one might plausibly propose that medicine could serve as an appropriate beginning to any study of Leibniz's philosophy: in 1672, early in Leibniz's four-year stay in Paris, Leibniz writes in one of a series of notes on physics the Hippocratic slogan, sympnoia panta (all things conspire).10 He believes that in some fashion or other this slogan should be extended to apply not just to the human body but also to the cosmos as a whole. This belief will, decades later, continue to serve as a succinct expression of his mature doctrine of preestablished harmony. Thus a principle originally articulated for the description of the human body, and as a motto of the preservation of its health, comes to underlie Leibniz's vision of the cosmos, and, even more deeply, his conception of the mutual expression of the infinitely many monads in the order of coexistence.

