# Lógica y Ontología

## Ontología Formal

Las __ontologías formales__ son teorías que intentan dar formulaciones matemátiacs precisas de las propiedades y las relaciones de ciertas entidades. Tales teorías usualmente proponen axiomas respecto a tales entidades, escritos en algún lenguaje formal basado en algún sistema de lógica formal. Pueden pensarse en tres tipos de ontología formal, dependiendo de sus ambiciones filosóficas:

1. Representacionales
2. Descriptivas
3. Sistemáticas

## Lógica

Varios sentidos en que puede entenderse la __Lógica__:

1. el estudio de los lenguajes formales artificiales
2. el estudio de las inferencias formalmente válidas y la _consecuencia lógica_
3. el estudio de las verdades lógicas
4. el estudio de las características generales, o la forma, de los juicios

On the one hand, logic is the study of certain mathematical properties of artificial, formal languages. It is concerned with such languages as the first or second order predicate calculus, modal logics, the lambda calculus, categorial grammars, and so forth. The mathematical properties of these languages are studied in such subdisciplines of logic as proof theory or model theory. Much of the work done in this area these days is mathematically difficult, and it might not be immediately obvious why this is considered a part of philosophy. However, logic in this sense arose from within philosophy and the foundations of mathematics, and it is often seen as being of philosophical relevance, in particular in the philosophy of mathematics, and in its application to natural languages.

## Lenguajes Formales Artificiales

En este sentido la lógica es el estudio de las _propiedades matemáticas_ de ciertos lenguajes formales, artificiales. Se ocupa de lenguajes tales como:

1. Calculo de Predicados de Primer Orden
2. Calculo de Predicados de Segundo Orden
3. Lógica Modal
4. Calculo Lambda
5. Gramáticas Categoriales
6. etc.

Las propiedades específicas son estudiades por sub-disciplinas como _teoría de la prueba (proof theory)_ o _teoría de modelos_. 

## Lógica de las Inferencias

Esta lidia con las __inferencias válidas__ y los buenos razonamientos basados en ellas. Esto no cubre, sin embargo, a los buenos razonamientos en su totalidad. De este último trabajo debería ocuparse una __teoría de la racionalidad__. Más bien, se ocupa de aquellas inferencias cuya valides puede rastrearse a las características formales de las representaciones involucradas en tales inferencias, sean linguisticas, mentales, u otro tipo de representaciones. Algunos __patrones__ de inferencia pueden verse como validos meramente mirando la forma de las representaciones involucradas en tal inferencia. 

Such a conception of logic thus distinguishes validity from formal validity. An inference is valid just in case the truth of the premises guarantees the truth of the conclusion, or alternatively if the premises are true then the conclusion has to be true as well, or again alternatively, if it can't be that the premises are true but the conclusion is false. Validity so understood is simply a modal notion, a notion about what has to be the case. Others might think of validity as involving are more fine grained hyperintensional notion, but in any case, validity so understood is not what logic is concerned with. Logic is concerned with formal validity, which can be understood as follows. In a system of representations, for example a language, it can be that some inferences are always valid as long as the representational or semantic features of certain parts of the representations are kept fixed, even if we abstract from or ignore the representational features of the other parts of the representations. So, for example, as long as we stick to English, and we keep the meanings of certain words like “some” and “all” fixed, certain patterns of inference, like some of Aristotle's syllogisms, are valid no matter what the meaning of the other words in the syllogism.[1] To call an inference formally valid is to assume that certain words have their meaning fixed, that we are within a fixed set of representations, and that we can ignore the meaning of the other words. The words that are kept fixed are the logical vocabulary, or logical constants, the others are the non-logical vocabulary. And when an inference is formally valid then the conclusion logically follows from the premises. This could be generalized for representations that are not linguistic, like graphic representations, though it would require a bit more work to do so. Logic is the study of such inferences, and certain related concepts and topics, like formal invalidity, proof, consistency, and so on. The central notion of logic in this sense is the notion of logical consequence. How this notion should be understood more precisely is presently widely debated, and a survey of these debates can be found in the entry on logical consequence.

A third conception of logic takes logic to be the study of special truths, or facts: the logical truths, or facts. In this sense logic could be understood as a science that aims to describe certain truths or facts, just as other sciences aim to describe other truths. The logical truths could be understood as the most general truths, ones that are contained in any other body of truths that any other science aims to describe. In this sense logic is different from biology, since it is more general, but it is also similar to biology in that it is a science that aims to capture a certain body of truths. This way of looking at logic is often associated with Frege.

This conception of logic can, however, be closely associated with the one that takes logic to be fundamentally about certain kinds of inferences and about logical consequence. A logical truth, on such an understanding, is simply one that is expressed by a representation which logically follows from no assumptions, i.e. which logically follows from an empty set of premises. Alternatively, a logical truth is one whose truth is guaranteed as long as the meaning of the logical constants is fixed, no matter what the meanings of the other parts in a representation are.

And there are other notions of ‘logic’ as well. One of them is historically prominent, but not very widely represented in the contemporary debate. We will briefly discuss it here nonetheless. According to this conception of logic, it is the study of the most general features of thoughts or judgments, or the form of thoughts or judgments. Logic thus understood will for example be concerned with the occurrence of subject and predicate structure that many judgments exhibit, and with other such general features of judgments. It will mostly be concerned with thoughts, and not directly with linguistic representations, though, of course, a proponent of this conception can claim that there is a very close connection between them. To talk about the form of a judgment will involve a subtly different notion of ‘form’ than to talk about the form of a linguistic representation. The form of a linguistic representation, basically, was what was left once we abstract from or ignore the representational features of everything except what we keep fixed, the logical constants. The form of a thought, on the other hand, is often understood as what is left over once we abstract from its content, that is, what it is about. We will briefly pursue the question below how these notions of form are related to each other. This conception of logic is associated with Kant. Kant distinguished different notions of logic (for example transcendental logic, general logic, etc.), but we won't be able to discuss these here. See the entry on Immanuel Kant for more.

One important philosophical aspect of logic, at least in the senses that deal with logical consequence and the forms of judgements, is its normativity. Logic seems to give us a guide how we ought to reason, and how we ought to draw inferences from one representation to another. But it is not at all clear what guide it gives us, and how we should understand more precisely what norms logic puts on our reasoning. For example, logic does not put us under the norm “If you believe A and you believe if A then B then you ought to believe B.” After all, it might be that I should not believe A and if A then B in the first place. So, in particular I shouldn't believe B. A reductio ad absurdum is a form of argument that illustrates this. If I believe A and if A then 0=1, then this should lead me to abandon my belief in A, not lead to a belief that 0=1. The consequences of my beliefs can lead me to abandon them. Still, if I have some reasons for my beliefs then I have at least some prima facie, but not necessarily conclusive, reason to hold the consequences of those beliefs. Logic might thus tell us at least this much, though: whenever I have some reason to believe A and if A then B, then I have a prima facie reason to believe B. See (Harman 1986) for the view that logic has no distinctive normative role, and (Field 2009) for a nice critical discussion of Harman's view and an argument why logic should be tied to norms of rationality.

And, of course, logic does not tell us how we ought to reason or infer in all particular cases. Logic does not deal with the particular cases, but only with the most generally valid forms of reasoning or inference, ones that are valid no matter what one reasons about. In this sense logic is often seen to be topic neutral. It applies no matter what one is thinking or reasoning about. And this neutrality, or complete generality of logic, together with its normativity, is often put as “logic is about how we ought to think if we are to think at all” or “logic is the science of the laws that we ought to follow in our thinking no matter what we think about”. There are well known philosophical puzzles about normativity, and these apply to logic as well if it is normative. One is why it is that thinkers are under such norms. After all, why shouldn't I think the way I prefer to think, without there being some norm that governs my thinking, whether I like it or not? Why is there an “ought” that comes with thinking as such, even if I don't want to think that way? One idea to answer this is to employ the notion of a ‘constitutive aim of belief’, the idea that belief as such aims at something: the truth. If so then maybe one could argue that by having beliefs I am under the norm that I ought to have true ones. And if one holds that one of the crucial features of logically valid inferences is that they preserve truth then one could argue that the logical laws are norms that apply to those who have beliefs. See (Velleman 2000) for more on the aim of belief. The normativity of logic will not be central for our discussion to follow, but the topic neutrality and generality will be.