# Rorty

The editors of the influential anthology After Philosophy: End or Transformation? note four common themes in the contemporary call to abandon philosophy (Baynes, Bohman and McCarthy 1987, 3-7): 

1. Against the claims that reason involves universality and necessity, stress is placed on the "contingency and conventionality of the rules, criteria, and products of what counts as rational speech and action at any given time and place". Logic and the canons of reason are not universal but local, the language games within which thought occurs are incommensurable, and items of belief are tangled within a web of other beliefs which are themselves entangled and impossible to justify in any immediacy of self-evidence. In short, any and all foundations are impossible. The impossibility of foundations does away with any Archimedean point, any god's-eye view from which to arbitrate competing claims, and all systems of rationality become contextual and perspectival—pure reason has become impure. 
2. The assumption of the sovereign rational subject is nullified. No longer is it possible to accept the Cartesian subject—disembodied, autonomous, atomistic—or any transcendental subjectivity fleeing the finitude of the body, the enculturation of a tradition, the biases and passions of the unconscious or the emotions. Dispelling with the myth of the pure presence of self, the subject is no longer capable of providing absolute objectivity and autonomy and is itself disclosed only within the linguistic world. 
3. No longer is knowledge considered as representation or mirroring of reality. Previously, the subject was considered to stand "here" over against the world of objects "over there". In addition to rejecting this image and the problem of bridging the subject/object gap, the notion of an objective and independent world is now called into question. There is no independent world of given facts and "the object of knowledge is always already pre-interpreted, situated in a scheme, part of a text, outside of which there are only other texts". Consequently, there is no method, no process, by which to "get it right" or know the world as it is in and of itself, at best there is interpretation or even just "coping" with the world. 
4. Philosophy is not an exalted science but merely another genre of literature. Reason is not somehow purer than rhetoric, poetry or literature, but is just another style or tradition of persuasion. Only by ignoring rhetorical devices and strategies within philosophy has the tradition succumbed to the illusion that philosophy engages in pure thought. Plato utilized rhetoric to attack the rhetoricians, and philosophy does so still.