Nach der allgemeinen Bestimmung des Sinnes des Leibnizischen Panlogismus und der Übersicht über seine Voraussetzungen wenden wir uns den theoretischen Mitteln zu, die die Durchführung der panlogistischen Auffassung des Universums ermöglichen. Es handelt sich um die logischen Äquivalente der ontologischen Bestimmungen, denen wir in den späteren Kapiteln begegnen werden. Die zunächst vorzutragenden Darlegungen betreffen die Theorie der Wahrheit, des Urteils, des Begriffen von Kontingenz operiert, schließlich der Verfahrensweisen des DemonKontingenz, wobei sich herausstellen wird, daß Leibniz mit zwei verschiedenen Begriffen von Kontingenz operiert, schließlich die Verfahrensweisen des Demonstrierens und Beweisens.


The differences between Gestalt theory and phenomenology are indisputable and have their basis in the fact that Gestalt theory is psychology, while Husserl's phenomenology aims at, and prepares the ground for, a universal philosophical science. Notwithstanding these differences resulting from divergences of general theoretical orientation, there is a common ground for these two lines of inquiry upon which they meet one another and upon which they can be further developed, the one with the help of the other. Precisely the problems dealt with in the first and, up to now, only volume of the Ideen lie upon this common ground.

- Gestalt es Psicología. 
- Fenomenología: Ciencia Filosófica Universal. 

"The integration into the context of constitutive phenomenology of results and theories which have been developed within a different context and in a different general orientation will, of course, entail something other than simple acceptance. They will have to be adapted to the new context by means of being reinterpreted in phenomenological terms."

In Husserl's descriptions, the same sense data (thought to be within the noetic side of consciousness) could undergo different interpretations and themselves remain unaltered by the difference in interpretations. Relocating the sense data into the noematic side of consciousness, where they are parts of a Gestalt contexture and thereby intrinsically affected by the prevailing noetic interpretation, allowed Gurwitsch to show how they could be altered, as part of what appeared, by the noetic functions operating in conformity with Gestalt theoretical organizational principles ( Field , 269–72; CW III , 260–64).

Husserl emphasized what I would call the "ontological" dimension of the noema. This is a concern with what the object is taken to be in a given experience of it and along with the properties and relations it is experienced to have (for example, a "bright blue" "book" "on the desk"). Within this dimension there is no place for sensory data. The "bright blue" that is experienced, for example, is the bright blue color that is a property of the object. Imagine that a dark blue sensation is experienced. Husserl could have this sensation, considered as part of the noetic side of consciousness, undergo two different interpretations: one that brought about the experience of an object as having a dark blue color; and another that brought about the experience of an object as having a bright blue color "covered" by a shadow. For Husserl, the dark blue sensation (in the noesis) remains identical throughout these two interpretations. Gurwitsch, on the other hand, focused on an "appearance" dimension of the noema, "relocating" sense data there, and would discuss the coloration within the appearance itself as something appearing differently as it changes as a result of the different interpretations: from being experienced to be a surface phenomenon under one interpretation to being experienced as being part of a detached sheet of shadow in the second—changes that alter the coloration intrinsically, so that no identity is experienced.

Dimensión "ontológica" del noema: azul brillante, azul obscuro. 

Según el ejemplo de William R. McKenna, experimentamos, por ejemplo, "azul brillante" - "libro" - "sobre la mesa". El "azul brillante" es una propiedad del objeto. Ahora imaginemos que experimentamos un azul obscuro. Para Husserl, tal sensación, del lado noético de la conciencia, puede llevar a dos interpretaciones: una es que el objeto es de color azul obscuro, la otra es que el objeto es azul brillante pero está "cubierto" por una sombra. Para Husserl, la sensación azul obscura (en la noesis) permanece indéntica en ambas interpretaciones. Gurwitsch, por su parte, se focaliza en la dimensión "aparente" (no ontológica) del noema, relocalizando los datos sensibles en el noema mismo, y discutira entonces la coloración al interior de cada apariencia, como algo que aparece de forma diferente y  cambia como resultado de diferenets interpretaciones: de ser experimentado como un fenómeno de superficie en una caso a ser experienciado como parte de una sombra en el segundo: esto cambia la coloración de forma instrínseca, de tal forma que ninguna identidad se experimenta. 

Consequently, the view that the immediate experience of space is both prior to and independent of our ordinary encounter with things and their spatial properties must be explicated in such a way that it (1) preserves the objectivity of immediately experienced space; (2) permits the abstraction of objective idealities while preserving the sense of necessity inherent in the sense of these idealities; and (3) permits the subsequent application of these idealities in our experience.

Teoría de la experiencia del Espacio tanto inmediata como a priori e independiente de nuestro encuentro con cosas y sus propiedades espaciales, tal que: 

1. Preserve la objetividad de la experiencia inmediata del espacio. 
2. Permita la abstracción de idealidades objetivas al mismo tiempo que preserva el sentido de necesidad inherente al sentido de estas idealidades. 
3. Permite la subsecuente aplicación de estas idealidades en nuestra experiencia. 