#1 Intro

#2 Chris y los poderes

Following de Ronde we can claim that QM lacks a conceptual scheme that would allow us to understand the realm of phenomena it explains. In this line, de Ronde offers a new ontology, different and independent from the one supposed in CM, that follows the following principles:
"The first important point according to our stance is to recall the fact that Aristotle grounded the notion of entity in the logical and ontological principles of *existence, non-contradiction and identity*. Our proposal is that in fact there exist analogous principles in QM which can allow us to develop new concepts. The principles of *indetermination, superposition and difference* could be considered as providing the logical and ontological foundation of that of which QM is talking about. [...] We claim that just like the logical and ontological principles of existence, non-contradiction and identity provide the constraints for a proper understanding of the concept of entity; the principles of indetermination, superposition and difference are able to determine the notion of power." (de Ronde, 2014:11)

##Powers
###Are indetermined
"We cannot \see" powers in the same way we see objects.6 Powers are experienced in actuality through elementary procesess. A power is sustained by a logic of actions which do not necessarily take place, it is and is not, hic et nunc." (12)
###Superpositions
"Powers can be superposed to different |even contradictory| powers. We understand a quantum superposition as encoding a set of powers each of which possesses a definite potentia" (13)
###Difference
"A power is experienced in actuality as a difference."
###No space, no time
"Powers are non-spatial and non-temporal. Within our interpretation the issue is to be resolved \right from the start": powers do not inhabit space nor time. A power cannot be thought as existing in space-time. It is only the process, through which the power is exposed, that space-time enters the scene. The process builds a bridge to bring the power from its potential existence into its space-time actual effectuation. This is the way through which a power is exposed, it is through an elementary process that the power makes contact with the actual." (15)
###Contextuality and relationality
"A power is a relational existent. A power is not composed by essences but by relations. It exists only in relation to other powers (in a definite PSA). It does not exist as a classical property independently of other properties. It exists as being indetermined, relating existence to a capability of being" (16)
"A power is a contextual existent. A power can produce an actual effectuation once the preconditions for its exposure become actual, i.e. once we construct in space-time the denite experimental arrangement which allow us to express the power"
###Experiencing powers
"But what is observed according to QM? Or in other words, what is a quantum experience?" (17)
"QM is a tactile theory."
"Powers make themselves present in the actual realm through action and change."
"Contrary to classical mechanics, which measures identities -a one to one correlation between object and apparatus-, in QM we always measure differences. Experience through difference is a tactile experience" (18)
_immanent cause_: "It is the immanent cause which allows us to connect the power with its actual effectuation without destroying nor deteriorating the power itself. The immanent cause allows for the expression of effects remaining both in the effects and its cause. It does not only remain in itself in order to produce, but also, that which it produces stays within. Thus, in its production of effects the potential does not deteriorate by becoming actual |as in the case of the hylemorphic scheme" (18-9)

de Ronde's propposal, then, consists of an expansion of the ontology of "physical nature", in the sense that, that which is natural, physical and the domain of study of physics, is not only grounded on an actualist, aristotelian-newtonian ontology, but also in an ontology of potentiality. This domain would be the one of QM. The beings in this domain, regulated by the 3 principles, are powers with potentia:
"We would like to remark the fact that our notion of immanent power is maybe the first physical notion to be characterized ontologically in terms of an objective probability measure. This concept escapes the ruling of actuality since it is founded on a different set of metaphysical principles to that of classical entities. Indeed, powers are indetermined, paraconsistent and contextual existents. Powers can be superposed and entangled with different -even contradictory- powers. A power, contrary to a property which can be only true or false possesses an intrinsic probabilistic measure, namely, its potentia. A potentia is intrinsically statistical, but this statistical aspect has nothing to do with ignorance. It is instead an objective feature of quantum physical reality itself." (de Ronde, 2016:34)

#3 Fenomenología: la correlación noético-noemática

Phenomenology claims there is a noetic-noematic correlation, this means a correlation between the acts consciousness performs and the objetcive pole, as intended. A noema is an object as constituted by the different noetic acts cc performs, and characterised by having a "sense" or "meaning".
From the noetic perspective, the same object can be percieved, remembered, phantasiezed, etc. The noema is a unity in the face of the multiplicity of acts cc performs.
The constitution of the noema is performed in levels, and the "lower" levels of the noema are said to be the fundament of the higher ones. In perception, phenomenology's paradigmatic mode of intentionality, is the originary intuition of the object "in the flesh" what serves as a fundament for the ulterior layers of the noema.
The noematic sense or nuclear layer of the noema is composed by the "empty x", which stands as the objective (transcendent) reference to the object, and the "objetc in the how of its determinations", that is what is intuited in the object as such. The object as intendend, is intended with a certain thesis, an attitude. 
In the higher levels, we find the different ways in which the object is given, according to different criteria, of which I will only mention the correlation between the characters of belief and the characters of being: certaintiy-truth; suspition-possibility; conjecture-probability; question-questionability; doubt-dubious. Certainty serves as the "mother-form" of them all, the not-modified form of belief.

"La percepción, por ejemplo, tiene su nóema, en lo más bajo su sentido preceptivo, es decir, lo percibido en cuanto tal. Igualmente tiene cada recuerdo lo recordado en cuanto tal, justo como suyo, exactamente como está 'mentado', como es 'consciente' en él; a su vez, el juzgar, lo juzgado en cuanto tal; el agrado, lo grato en cuanto tal, etc. Dondequiera hay que tomar el correlato noemático, que aquí se llama 'sentido' (en una significación muy ampliada), exactamente así como está "inmanente" en la vivencia de la percepción, del juicio, del agrado, etc., es decir, como, si preguntamos puramente a esta vivencia misma, nos es ofrecido por ella." (213-4)

"Por tanto, podría sacarse esta conclusión: existe sin duda un paralelismo entre la nóesis y el nóema, pero de tal suerte, que las estructuras correspondientes tienen que describirse por ambos lados y en su esencial corresponderse. Lo noemático sería el campo de las unidades, lo noético el de las multiplicidades "constituyentes"" (Husserl, :241)


#4 La empatía como caso

Empathy is an interesting example because it requires a special mode of constitution. Unlike the rest of the objects we find in our life-world, there are those that appear to us not only as "objects", but also (and mainly) as other subjects like us, as _alter ego_. 
The "problem" lies in the fact that we cannot have a perception, an originary intuition of the experiences of the other and therefore, we must fundament our constitution in something else.
We percieve the bodys of the others, but not their cc. This one is apresented to us, but no like the unseen faces of an object, because we can never fullfill it in perception. To have an authentic empathy, we must fulfill this intuition in imagination, instead of perception. We fundament this in a transference we perform, the fact that we can percieve that certain bodies move and "act" like our own bodies serves as motivations for us to constitute their bodies as alter ego. We experience the movement of the body of the other as animated movement, we understand that their bodies move as a product of their will, as it is the case with ourselves. I see the other in her body, not like two different thins ajoined, but like a unity.
In attributing beliefs, intentions, desires and, in general, meaning, to the actions these other bodies perform, I can constitute the other as such. 

#5 La constitución del poder

De Ronde wishes to offer an ontology different from the "classical" one that serves a fundament for classical physics, for the phenomena of the quantum domain. Posing the problem in phenomenological terms, we could say that this ontology offers the structure of certain noemata, the principles under which something could be thought of as a meaningful object, with a unity-moment. In general terms, then, what we would be lacking is an accurate description of the noetic acts involved in the consitution of the power. This is what phenomenology could offer as a method.

##The possibility of powers
The idea alone of a type of existent following these peculiar principles is not particulary toublesome from a phenomenological perspective. This is where the empathy case comes in: as a matter of fact, in our everyday experience, we constitute meaningful noemata that, at least, do not respond to an Aristotelian-Newtonian ontology. When I attribute high-order beliefs, feelings, desires, intentions to an alter ego, I constitute her, and yet, it is not possible to offer a yes-no answer for each 'proerty' I could attribute to this being. The human psyche is indeed an example of a contradictory, contextual and even indeterminate being we can succesfully constitute, with all the limitations that implies. I can constitute a girl as wanting me and not wanting me; I can constitute a friend as being happy for me and not happy for me; I can constitute a stranger as wanting to hurt me and not wanting to hurt me. And the truth is that, until they act and so something I can percieve (actualize their indeterminate states), those "states" or "parts" of the experience of the other are not determined one way or the other.
In this sense, a first conclusion would be: it is possible to constitute beings following de Ronde's power ontology, because we do so already.

##Powers as physical beings (noematic problems)
But that's not the end of it. The ontological principles de Ronde offers are not entirely new to the history of philosophy-science. They resemble very closely what can be called, in general terms, the domain of the ideal (non local, non temporal, non causal). 
According to husserlian phenomenology being is either real or ideal. Real is that which is spatio-temporal (what de Ronde calls 'actual'), while "ideal" is what is not. There is no ontological preeminence of one over the other.
So far so good. The very big problem, and in this de Ronde is completley original (to my knowledge), is that the domain we can call "physical nature", domain to be studied by physical science, belongs, classicaly, to the real. So what de Ronde comes to say is that there is, also, a domain of ideal that is physical nature and can be studied by a physical science. The very big problem is quite simple: for it to be physical nature (and not only abstract mathematics or logics or formalism), we need some kind of intuition in experience to fundament our constitution of powers as physical beings, and not only 'ideal', in the normal understanding of the term.

##In search of an intuition (noetic problems)
Following the principle of the noetic-noematic correlation, to have a fully constituted noema, that could serve as a scientific concept to understand the quantum domain, we need to find the proper acts that could constitute such noema, with these specific ontological principles. If we accept that we do already constitute noemata with at least similar ontological principles, it could serve as a methodological tool to search for the corresponding noetic acts in said cases.
In the case of empathy we can constitute the other as an alter ego without having a perception of their experiences. But we are able to presentify this in imagination, thanks to the actual perception of their physical body. So even if we cannot percieve powers in an originary intuition, we could at least presentify them, by fundamenting said presentification in another intuition or in the perception of something else. 
If this is possible, and if it is, how, are open questions I cannot answer here. But something in the level of fundamental intuition must be offered if powers are to be "true physical concepts", as de Ronde wants, that would allow us a further and more complete understanding of the quantum domain. 
The beginning of an answer can be sought, as de Ronde himself suggests, in experiences that are closer in their nature to that of the ontological being of powers: experiences of difference, of non-locality, non-temporality, etc.  

##Characters of belief and being (the correlation)
One last problem concerns how to understand the demand of having certainty (as required by physical science) of somehting that is, in its essence, probabilistic or indeterminate, as quantum derondian powers are. As we saw earlier, to certainty corresponds truth or being as it is, pure and simply. Should we say that we must, for the quantum domain, renounce certainty? Or should we say that it is possible to be certain of something that is probable?
Both options seem to have their problems, but also their quota of truth. Powers or no powers, there seems to be certainty in QM regarding the predictions of measurement outcomes and of the probability values of the states prior to measurement. At the same time, there is no certainty whatsoever regarding the passage from the state of superposition to the result of the measurement.
We could take the notion of the correlation between characters of belief and being itself, as a possible candidate to replace a boolean logic of truth and false, at the conceptual level, for QM. I mean: in the correlation between characters of belief and of being, we find a case of the noetic-noematic correlation. This distinction is not one of epistemic access. When I have certainty, it is because the object itself is given to me 'fully' in an originary intuition. Classicaly, this object given is identical to itself, non-contradictory and determinate. The point would be to say that, given the right constitution of the notion of power as a quantum being, we could have certainty of a noematic correlate that is, in its nature, of a different ontological nature: contextual, superposed and different ('probable' as a character of being in phenomenological terms). We could even think of constituting the result of a measurement, something determinate and 'given fully', as being correspondend by the conjecture (noetic) character of belief, inasmuch as it offers only partial information regarding that after which we are inquiring: the power.