# Corolianus

# Maps to the Stars

Film de David Cronenberg, localizado en L.A. y filmado allí, lo que es loco dado que D.Cronenberg filmo sus películas en Canada. De hecho, una de las escenas sucede en la puerte de un negocio, donde Julian Moore acaba de gastar 18 mil dolares. 

Some of it was filmed there, too—the first occasion on which the director, who seldom __roams__ (VAGAR) beyond his own back yard of Canada, has shot a movie in the United States. One scene unfolds on Rodeo Drive, outside a clothing store where a character has just spent eighteen thousand dollars. The sight of Cronenberg and his crew setting up there, in broad daylight, must have seemed not merely unsettling but, to any Hollywood residents who were passing by, downright unhealthy. I’m surprised they didn’t call the cops or, better yet, an epidemiologist. When the guy who made “__Rabid__” (rabioso) and “The Fly” turns up in town, there’s no accounting for the damage he might see, or show, or do.

The woman with the fancy clothes is Havana Segrand (Julianne Moore), an actress who, if not washed up, __is drifting__ (ir a la deriva)  in with the __tide__. She had a famous mother named Clarice Taggart (Sarah Gadon), also an actress, who died in a __conflagration__ (conflagaración, conflicto violento) and now keeps appearing, youthful and __uncharred__ (sin carbonizar - charred, carbonizar, calcinar), before Havana’s eyes—in the bathtub, say, or on the massage table. This begs for therapy, which in Havana’s case means stripping to her underwear and submitting to Stafford Weiss (John Cusack), a shamanistic shrink who will __rub away__ (quitar frotando) your painful memories as if they were spasms of lumbago. Havana’s sex life comprises a __desultory__ (inconexo) threesome and a quickie in the back seat of a car. What she truly desires is a new personal assistant—or “chore whore,” to use her fragrant term. A contender arrives, in the shape of Agatha (Mia Wasikowska), who comes recommended by Carrie Fisher (“I met her on Twitter”). Agatha wears long black gloves, which conceal scars from a house fire. She gets the job.

All this lies within __scorching__ (abrasador) distance of parody: an occupational __hazard__ (peligro), as Nathanael West realized, for anyone facing up to Hollywood. Overkill comes with the territory. That is why “Sunset Boulevard” begins with a corpse, bobbing in a pool, and proceeds to an old dame who keeps a stuffed ape in a casket, and that is why Cronenberg introduces us to the delightful Benjie (Evan Bird), the star of the hit comedy “Bad Babysitter,” who is fresh out of rehab and calls his agent a “Jew faggot.” Benjie is thirteen. “Three hundred thousand a week—I was nine years old. How psychotic is that?” he says. Cronenberg-watchers will twitch with anticipation; he has always been drawn to the smell of psychosis, like a wasp to a picnic.

The mood at the start is thick not with mystery, as in David Lynch’s “Mulholland Drive,” but with exasperation, as we struggle to work out who is related—or helplessly clamped—to whom. Hence the recurring theme of incest, which is another kind of parody: the heinous contortion of romantic love. Agatha announces that her parents were brother and sister, and she herself is reunited, under intense conditions, with a long-lost sibling. As for Havana, she pitches aggressively for a role first played by her late mother (who at one point appears naked in her bed). She loses the part and howls like Antigone, then gets it back—because her rival has suffered a death in the family—and skips around, chanting, like a little girl. Throughout this near-insanity, Cronenberg keeps his cool, to the brink of refrigeration. In terms of camera movements, he is the king of underkill. When Stafford, the self-help guru who cannot help himself, thumps a defenseless woman and slings her out of the house, we crawl stealthily in her wake, toward the open door.

Why, then, does “Maps to the Stars” fail to compel as it should? In part, I think, because Viggo Mortensen has spoiled us. His great performances for Cronenberg, in “A History of Violence” and “Eastern Promises,” reminded us that the director is at his strongest when he has a hero to haul us through whatever nightmare has been laid on. That was true of James Woods in “Videodrome” and Jeremy Irons in “Dead Ringers,” both of them masterly figures who seemed nonetheless at the mercy of instinctual drives, whereas someone like Havana is less well poised; she is the dupe of her foolish appetites, and that’s that. Moore holds nothing back, and the result makes a splendidly noisy companion piece to her Oscar-winning turn in “Still Alice,” but Havana, on her own, can’t hold the story together. I wanted more both of Cusack, who is genuinely frightening, with his heavy tread, his black garb, and his clown-white face, and of Robert Pattinson, who plays a chauffeur named Jerome Fontana—a downgrade from his leading role in Cronenberg’s “Cosmopolis,” where he lounged in the back of a limo. Why not have Jerome, a ready-jaded hopeful, steer us into Hollywood’s dark vales?

There is another issue here. According to Cronenberg, the script for “Maps to the Stars,” by Bruce Wagner, began life more than twenty years ago, and it shows. When Jerome says to Agatha that he’s thinking of converting to Scientology, “just as a career move,” it’s a nice line, but it’s also a reboot of a joke in Robert Altman’s “The Player,” where a studio executive goes to A.A. not because he has a drink problem but because “that’s where all the deals are being made these days.” Doubtless, Wagner’s work has been through many morphings and refinements, yet there remains a nagging sense that the finished film lags behind the times. The truth is that, in 2015, Havana would be lucky to play a second-string intergalactic queen for Marvel, and Benjie’s agent would already be positioning him as the Spider-Man of 2020.

As a portrait of the movie industry, “Maps to the Stars” pales beside the fire of a film like Robert Aldrich’s “The Big Knife,” from sixty years ago, which had everything: a Clifford Odets screenplay you could sear yourself on, Jack Palance in his tortured prime, and, as the studio boss, Rod Steiger, with his silk-soft __croon__ (canturrear) and a startling thatch of bright hair. (So that’s where Javier Bardem sprang from in “Skyfall.”) Cronenberg, bereft of Aldrich’s will to attack, is more surgeon than satirist. We go to his work not for digs and jibes but for steady incisions into the ills of the flesh, or the pains of the spirit, and “Maps to the Stars” is at its most potent and beautiful by far when it becomes a ghost story—when the departed, not just Havana’s mother, return to quiz the living. That makes an ideal twist for Hollywood, a place both besotted with and dismissive of its past. More important, these spectral scenes suggest new ground for Cronenberg. He went there, __fleetingly__ (fugazmente), in “The Dead Zone.” Time for another visit.

Jiminy __Cricket__: Pepito Grillo.