# Fin de la Infancia

Summary

Prologue

It is the late twentieth century. For years, the Soviet Union and the United States have been in a race to create the first spaceship with a nuclear drive. Reinhold is the main scientist for the U.S.; Konrad Schneider is the USSR's specialist. However, just as both scientists are poised for success, giant alien spaceships appear from the skies and land over every major world city.

Chapter 2

The first chapter takes place five years after the prologue. The Overlords, as the humans call the aliens, have "conquered" all of Earth and set about instituting many new changes. For six days after their arrival, the ships had hovered over the cities, watching the worlds' reaction. On the sixth day, the voice of the being that humans would come to call the Supervisor, Karellen, was relayed across every radio frequency. Speaking perfect English, Karellen informed all of Earth that its affairs were being taken over. Instantly, nations realized their sovereignty was at an end. One superpower attempted to destroy a rival by firing a nuclear missile at an Overlord ship, but the missile had simply vanished into thin air. Only one government had refused to submit to the admittedly fair demands of the Overlords. The Republic of South Africa would not end its policy of discrimination, so the Overlords mysteriously blocked out the sun for half an hour. Afterward, no further demonstrations of power were needed. From then on, life steadily improved for all of humanity throughout the world, as the Overlords effected their changes.

While most of the Overlords' commands are transmitted through text messages, the Earth does have one personal liaison to Karellen: Stormgren, the Secretary- General of the United Nations. As the chapter begins, Stormgren is about to meet with Wainwright, a clergyman and the leader of the Freedom League, an organizatio that opposes the domination of the Overlords, despite the Overlords' so-far friendly attitude. The Freedom League objects to the "coddling" of the Overlords, meddling in human affairs. They don't like the idea of the World Federation, the Overlords' plan for a world government. Even more importantly, they object to the fact that the Overlords will not reveal what they look like. Even Stormgren, who has met with Karellen for years, has never actually seen him. Stormgren agrees to address the League's concerns at his next meeting with the Supervisor.

Stormgren accordingly visits Karellen soon after. He is taken up in a tiny, egg- shaped ship to Karellen's ship, which hovers fifty kilometers over New York. Karellen already knows all about the interview with Wainwright, because the Overlords have spying devices all over Earth. Karellen banters with Stormgren, and points out that men like Wainwright fear Karellen because he is a powerful threat to the world's religions. He knows that they wonder how long the Overlords have been watching mankind, and whether they know the truth behind Buddha, Christ and Muhammed. As for revealing himself, Karellen tells Stormgren that he will consult his superiors and ask for permission.

Analysis

Childhood's End was developed from one of Clarke's earlier short stories, "Guardian Angel." The main conceit of both "Guardian Angel" and the first half of Childhood's End is taking the old cliché of the "alien invasion" and turning it on its head. The Overlords don't start blowing up every Earth capital. Instead, they use their power to stop governments from fighting among themselves. The Overlords work to end war, disease, and hunger, and raise the standard of living for everyone on Earth. The primary method of achieving this is the discreet but firm use of power. Tasks like absorbing nuclear missiles without so much as an explosion and blotting out the sun present few difficulties to the Overlords but still have a maximum effect. Neither results in a loss of human life. The theory used by the Overlords is actually somewhat similar to the idea of deterrence used in the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union. The giant nuclear missiles built by both countries were not intended to ever be fired, though they were capable of it; they were intended only to deter the other superpower from attempting to attack. The Overlords work the same way: they make their vast powers known so the humans don't make any foolish moves, but they do not intend to use that power to create human suffering.

However, both violent and beneficent "invasions" are still invasions, and Wainwright and his Freedom League are representative of that. One of the themes of Childhood's End is the question of freedom and what it entails. Regardless of how much better the Overlords make things for humans, they are basically coddling humanity. With their displays of power, the Overlords cow humanity into a form of submission. Admittedly, it's the most pleasant form of submission possible; as the novel progresses, life on Earth comes closer and closer to a utopia. But even utopias have their limitations, particularly in keeping the populace from being bored. But regardless of boredom, it is very likely that humans would become restless (inquieto) in a utopia (as Jan Rodricks does later in the novel). But the problems of a utopian society become more important later in the book. "Guardian Angel," the short story upon which Childhood's End is based, is less concerned with the creation of a utopian society as it is with humanity's desire to see what Karellen and his fellow Overlords look like. For reasons unknown to both the characters and the reader at this early point in the novel, Karellen refuses to reveal the physical appearance of the Overlords. This refusal is a key issue for the Freedom League; it is difficult to trust the Overlords, despite all their actions, without having seen them.

There is one key conversation in Chapter 2 between Stormgren and his assistant, Van Ryberg. It foreshadows many of the issues in the book, and contains a small joke as well. While discussing Karellen and his vast intellectual superiority to humans, Stormgren admits that while one man could not do all the things Karellen does, he believes that eventually men could reach his level of intelligence. That is, Stormgren believes that the technological and intellectual achievements of the Overlords are within human reach. He's possibly correct, but the irony is that the evolutionary potential of humanity actually exceeds that of the Overlords, though it will not be known until the end of the novel. The second foreshadowing is a little more amusing: speaking of Karellen, Van Ryberg asks, "Why the devil won't he show himself?" The answer, of course, is because Karellen is, in terms of his appearance, the Devil.

Chapter 3

Stormgren is having trouble sleeping. He goes out on his balcony and contemplates over New York City. He is becoming obsessed with wondering what Karellen looks like. He is sure that there is no form he could not come to accept and perhaps even find beautiful. The next day, Stormgren's assistant, Van Ryberg, discovers that Stormgren has gone missing.

Stormgren awakes to find himself a prisoner in an underground bunker. His captor is "Joe," who claims that the bunker cannot be reached by the Overlords' spying devices. At first, Stormgren believes that Wainwright has planned this, but when he remembers Wainwright's opposition to violence, it dawns on him that his kidnapping is the work of a radical contingent of the Freedom League. Joe tells Stormgren that they will wait several days for some "visitors" to arrive. These "visitors" turn out to be a group of well-dressed gentlemen, lead by an old Welshman. They are interested in knowing as much as they can about Stormgren's trips to visit Karellen. Stormgren describes the small, egg-shaped ship that transports him up to Karellen's flagship and the room where he meets with Karellen. The room contains a blank viewscreen; Karellen can see Stormgren through it, but not vice versa. Stormgren tries to persuade the gentlemen that Karellen and has only good intentions, pointing out the ban on cruelty to animals. He also notes how hopeless their cause is, since the Overlords are near omnipotent. The gentlemen ignore this argument, but they suggest that perhaps a device could be used to examine the small room where Stormgren meets with Karellen.

Suddenly, the gentlemen freeze completely, as if time itself had stood still. Karellen's voice comes to Stormgren from a small floating device. Karellen has used Stormgren as "bait" so he could locate and track these gentlemen. As Karellen leads Stormgren to freedom, Stormgren decides that he might create a device himself to investigate the small room.

Chapter 4

Stormgren meets with a scientist friend, who agrees to make a tiny device that could investigate the conference room where Stormgren meets with Karellen. The scientist points out that the "blank screen" Karellen uses to see Stormgren may actually be no more than a piece of one-way glass. Several weeks later, Stormgren goes to his usual meeting, carrying the paperwork for the proposed world government, the World Federation. He also has a small scanning device built into his briefcase. At the meeting, Karellen tells him that the Overlords will reveal their physical appearance to the world in fifty years. This will satisfy many supporters of the Freedom League, if not the League itself.

Wainwright is not happy with the decision, believing that mankind will have lost all its independence and memory of independence within fifty years. Stormgren disagrees, but either way the Freedom League has lost some of their credibility. Stormgren then consults with his scientist friend. Their suspicions are confirmed: Karellen is standing directly behind the "viewscreen," or rather, the one-way glass. The scientist then arms Stormgren with a powerful flashlight that he can use to see Karellen.

Stormgren meets with Karellen for the last time, since he will be retiring from the position of Secretary-General soon. Karellen tells him that when the Overlords reveal themselves, the human race will suffer a brief "psychological discontinuity" but they will recover, since the humans of that age will be more stable and used to the Overlords. Karellen also admits that the Overlords have "had failures" in shepherding other races, but he won't say anything more. As he finishes speaking, Karellen suddenly cries "good-bye," and Stormgren barely has time to put the flashlight up to the glass. Years later, in an interview, a journalist asks Stormgren about the rumor that he once saw Karellen. Stormgren denies it, but the narrator tells the reader that Stormgren did see Karellen and understands why the Overlords must wait to reveal themselves.

Analysis

When reading the first few chapters of Childhood's End, it should be kept in mind that they originally stood on their own as a single short story, called "Guardian Angel." Author Arthur C. Clarke did not change very much of the text between the short story and the novel version. Clarke wrote "Guardian Angel" to be published in a science fiction magazine in the 1940s. These magazines paid so many cents to the word, so it was in the author's interest to stretch his or her stories as much as possible. The more words in the story, the more money they made. As a result, the first part of Childhood's End is a little slow, and it contains many sub-plots and scenes that don't really add much to the story. These two chapters contain several such sub-plots. Unfortunately, these sub-plots do little to advance the reader's understanding of the Overlords or of their relations with humans. For instance, the scene with the "visitors," the radical members of the Freedom League, could have helped make it clear to us what the arguments of the Freedom League are and why they don't like the Overlords. Instead, the entire kidnapping is a plot device: it serves only to give Stormgren the idea of using a scanning device in his meetings with Karellen. Stormgren could easily have thought of this idea on his own, but by including the whole kidnapping sub-plot, Clarke is able to stretch out his story and perhaps make it a little more dramatic.

Like many early science fiction authors, Arthur C. Clarke has very good ideas for his stories, but his writing style is not particularly good. His characters are usually not very well-developed, and the plot tends to trudge along slowly. This does not mean Clarke is a bad writer. It means that his strength lies in the ideas of his novels, not in the writing or his characters. However, this means that whenever his characters or plot are not exploring the ideas of the novel, it tends to drag or lose some of its meaning.

As mentioned before, Childhood's End, is different from the short story it is based on, "Guardian Angel." The first half of Childhood's End is almost identical, word-for-word, as "Guardian Angel." The big question in "Guardian Angel" is, "What do the Overlords look like?" That is why these early chapters are so concerned with finding that out. The big question of Childhood's End is, "What are the Overlords doing on Earth?" Chapters 3 and 4 were originally written as part of "Guardian Angel," so they are more occupied with the first question. These chapters inform the reader that the Overlords apparently have very good reasons for not revealing themselves. These reasons have something to do with their appearance, and the effect they believe it will have on humans. In order to make sure that humans are mentally capable of handling the sight of the Overlords, Karellen (or his superior) decides to wait fifty years. By then, most people on Earth will have lived with the Overlords all their lives. More importantly, they will all have lived in a period of intellectual enlightenment, so that they will have very open minds and will be prepared to deal with the Overlords, whatever they look like.

Chapter 5

It is fifty years since Stormgren retired, and the day that the Overlords will finally reveal themselves to mankind has arrived. There is only one ship now, Karellen's ship, hovering over New York; all the other ships, over the other world capitals, turned out to be mere projections. The ship moves away from New York and lands in a wide field. As thousands of reporters and onlookers surround the ship, a door opens. Karellen's voice is heard, inviting two children near the entrance to come up. Karellen then steps out of the ship, cradling a child in each arm. He is much taller than a human, perhaps nine or ten feet tall. He has ebony-black skin, leathery wings, and large horns protruding from his head. He also has a long, barbed tail. In short, Karellen looks exactly like a medieval drawing of the Devil. To the credit of the Overlords' work on Earth, only a few humans faint at the sight of this ancient legend come to life.

Chapter 6

In the fifty years since Stormgren's retirement, the Overlords have created a single world government. In a flashback, Karellen explains to Stormgren that the best way to fight problems is through the "correct" use of power. For instance, if a dictator chose to lead his nation in defying the Overlords and their power, Karellen would not simply destroy the country with weapons. Instead, he would slowly drive the leader mad with whispers in their head, preventing them from sleeping or thinking clearly. With these subtle, psychological methods, the Overlords were able to achieve peace on Earth.

The brief shock and revulsion that some people felt after seeing the Overlords for the first time has quickly worn off, though some people are still panicked when they see an Overlord. The narrator suggests that this may be due to "racial memory," the idea that humans may have had a disastrous contact with the Overlords in the past, and so they had developed an instinct to fear the appearance of the Devil. The Overlords now rarely leave their ship, for the gravity of Earth is too strong for them, and the sunlight too harsh. Despite the fact that they have revealed themselves, only a handful of humans have ever seen an Overlord in person.

By the standards of all previous ages, Earth is now a utopia. Every man is guaranteed food, water, and comfortable shelter, even if they choose not to work. War and violence are a thing of the past; when the resources are spread out evenly everywhere, there is no desire for theft. Even crimes of passion are nearly unheard of, for the rising standards of living have also contributed to rising intelligence and psychological stability. Many cities have been abandoned, for the methods of trade and commerce have radically changed. Production is almost entirely automatic, handled by robots and automated factories. Humans work for the sake of luxury items only. The pace of life has also slowed down; people have more time to meditate and contemplate. They spend much of their time in pursuits of leisure, such as playing sports, watching television and films, or going to school.

Religion has been almost eliminated due to a device given to scientists by the Overlords. It allows a person to look at any instant in time over the last five thousand years, although there are occasionally gaps in the timeline. But this allowed people to see the true lives of people like Christ and Muhammed, and it did much to eliminate religion as an influence. But with the end of strife comes an end to the passion for art, and the works of the current generation do not come close to those of the past. No one is worried about this but a few philosophers. Earth has yet to suffer from the greatest danger to a utopia: boredom. But most importantly, while Earth may be a utopia, no one knows what the Overlords' ultimate plans for Earth are.

Analysis

Chapter 5 marks the end of "Guardian Angel," the short story that served as the springboard for Childhood's End. The main idea of "Guardian Angel" was the irony of having the saviors of mankind turn out to look exactly like the Devil. This can suggest many things. It could be that the author is suggesting that the Overlords have something bad planned for mankind, someday. It could be a lesson not to judge a book by its proverbial cover: even though they look like the Devil, the Overlords are very kind to humans. But more likely, the author simply thought it would be interesting to find a way to make the Devil real. The original short story ended with this:

This hints at something terrible far in the distant future. Could this be Armageddon? If this were true, then the arrival of Karellen, the Devil, is the coming of the Antichrist. But if that's so, then Karellen seems to be an awfully friendly Antichrist. On the other hand, there are some people who might argue that a utopia is nothing less than Armageddon, because it would almost certainly result in the stagnation of the human race--a kind of intellectual Armageddon. But the most important thing is the irony: the Devil as the savior of humanity.

Chapter 6 deals more with the issues of a utopia itself. First, there is the question of how such a utopia is created. Karellen tells Stormgren that all political problems can be solved through "the correct use of force." Stormgren rightly points out that this seems to argue that "might makes right"--that is, the Overlords are just bullying humans into doing the "right" thing. But the important word is "correct." By using the "correct" use of force. The Overlords use subtle methods to make sure the humans do what they're asked to do. Karellen tries to minimize the amount of human suffering.

The utopia created by the Overlords certainly sounds appealing. Everyone has enough to eat, everyone can do whatever they want. There is little crime and disease, and no war or poverty. But there are already clouds on the horizon: there are no longer any good works of art, and soon, people may soon become bored. People in a utopia lack a sense of purpose; this may soon become a problem for many people on Earth.

Chapter 7

George Greggson and Jean Morrel, a couple, attend a party hosted by Rupert Boyce. They are greeted at Boyce's door by a holographic projection of Boyce himself. The device allows Boyce, a "superveterinarian," to investigate all the animals over a vast area of jungle without getting too close to them. Boyce has just recently remarried, and the party is a chance for his new wife to become acquainted with his friends. The new wife is gorgeous, and George is clearly attracted to her, but Jean pulls him away to explore the rest of the house.

They make their way to the library, where Boyce keeps the world's largest library on paranormal research--phenomena such as telepathy, telekinesis, contact with the spirit world, and other such things. They are shocked to discover an Overlord in the library, swiftly (rapidamente) reading a book. His name is Rashaverak, and he claims to be doing psychological research. Soon, all three of them head back down to the party, where Rashaverak causes quite a sensation and is subjected to endless conversation. George decides to take a break and goes out onto the roof of the house. There he meets __Jan Rodricks__, the brother of Boyce's new wife. George quickly retreats back to the party, but Rodricks remains outside.

Chapter 8

Jan Rodricks is a young man of twenty-seven. He has spent most of his life studying physics and astronomy. He is a restless man, not willing to be content under the utopian rule of the Overlords. He feels it is no coincidence that the Overlords arrived at the very moment mankind was about to step into space. He believes the Overlords, whatever their reasons, are deliberately preventing man from ever conquering space as they have done. Jan has watched many Overlord supply ships come and go from Earth, but neither he nor any other scientists have been able to decipher the technology the Overlords use.

Boyce's party ends. Jan heads back inside, and Greg and Jean are still there, as well as Rashaverak. Boyce decides to have a little fun by holding a séance (sesión) and having the group use a Ouija board. Jean is particularly excited at this prospect, but George is very skeptical. The responses from the board are very cryptic: when asked "Who are you?" it responds, "I am all." The board gives a surprising number of accurate answers, and to George's surprise, he finds it is difficult to consciously alter the progress of the board's needle. Finally, Jan asks, "Which star is the Overlords' sun?" and the board responds with: "NGS 549672"--an identification number for a star. This answer confuses most of the participants, but it is quickly forgotten when Jean faints.

Analysis

These chapters represent a departure from the previous direction of the novel. Until this point, the novel has followed author Arthur C. Clarke's short story, "Guardian Angel" almost word-for-word. Clarke wrote "Guardian Angel" first, then later expanded it into Childhood's End. "Guardian Angel" ends when the Overlords reveal themselves and turn out to look exactly like the Devil. The most important question in "Guardian Angel" is, "What do the Overlords look like?" But Childhood's End takes the story further, asking the question, "What are the Overlords doing on Earth?" In a broader sense, Childhood's End examines the question of whether humanity has a purpose or direction, whether humans are "evolving" to a higher life form--in short, the novel is searching for the meaning of life in a world without religion.

In Chapter 7, the reader gets the first few hints of what the Overlords' plans for humanity are. Rashaverak has an odd interest in the paranormal, the study of superhuman abilities such as telepathy, telekinesis, and other powers. It is not clear exactly why the Overlords have this interest, but apparently it is strong enough for an Overlord to leave his ship and spend time at a human's house.

Chapter 7 also introduces the character of George Greggson and Jean Morrel, who will be important characters for the rest of the novel. George in particular will be important as an observer. He will have little or no part in the developments of the plot, but he will provide an eyewitness account of what happens. Since he is skeptical of things such as the paranormal, George is a good character to use as an observer, since his perception of what happens will not be troubled by bias. For instance, in the scene with the Ouija board, George tries to think of a logical explanation for why the board is answering so many questions correctly; he suggests that perhaps people are subconsciously directing the Ouija board's needle. Jean, on the other hand, firmly believes in the paranormal, so her observations might be biased: she might jump to conclusions or make guesses about what is going on that would confuse the reader.

Jan Rodricks is the other character who will become very important for the rest of Childhood's End. He is a young astrophysicist who dreams of going into space. Jan represents the tendency of some humans to become restless in any situation, no matter how well things are going. While the Overlords have brought peace and prosperity to Earth, they have taken away some of the sense of purpose in human life. The narrator points out that, "When the Overlords had abolished war and hunger and disease, they had also abolished adventure." This is the problem that confronts Jan. The Overlords have left humanity with nothing to work on. The Overlords have all the answers, so why bother looking for them? Why continue to study anything, particularly the stars? As an astrophysicist, Jan has even more reason to be bitter than most scientists. The Overlords have forbidden mankind to work on spaceships. Scientists can only watch, from distant telescopes, as the Overlords vanish into space in their light speed ships. Jan wants to visit the stars and other planets. In his restless desire to explore, Jan represents the inability in many humans to accept any kind of limits, no matter how kindly they are imposed. While the Overlords may have made a heaven of life on Earth, they also seem to have eliminated any possibility of moving beyond that heaven.

Chapter 9

On his ship, Karellen meets with Rashaverak, who reports on his observations at Rupert Boyce's party. Rashaverak tells him that Boyce himself is rather uninteresting and that, while Boyce has the world's largest library of paranormal research, he is as much a skeptic as any scientist. This is important to the Overlords; they are about scientists actively exploring things like telepathy and telekinesis. It turns out that the Ouija board was correct: the star of the Overlords homeworld is NGS 549672. Rashaverak says that Jean Morrel must have been "the channel through which the information came." The Overlords do not say who--or what--this information may have come from. Rashaverak suggests that Jean be watched closely, because "she may be the most important human being alive." The two Overlords also discuss Jan Rodricks, who asked the question about the star. Though he now knows where their homeworld is, Karellen dismisses him as a threat. Jan has no way of independently verifying the information--humans are not allowed to build spaceships that can travel any further than the moon.

Meanwhile, George has been shaken by Jean's fainting spell. He realizes how much he loves her, and so he proposes they join in a marriage contract. Jean agrees. Elsewhere, Jan quickly investigates NGS 549672. He discovers that it is exactly in line with the direction the Overlord ships take when they leave the solar system. His biggest problem now is figuring out what he can do with this information.

Chapter 10

The human race continues to enjoy its blissful peace and prosperity. At the same time, small problems are beginning to emerge. For instance, the narrator notes, the headlines in the newspapers are rather dull compared to those of a century before. Without war, murder, and exploration, there is little to put on the front page. Robots run all the production, while men expand their minds through education. Education is the primary way that humanity now fends off boredom. Nearly a quarter of all human activity is now expended on sports, resulting in so many good athletes that professional sports are all but eliminated. After sports, the greatest single industry in the utopian Earth is, of course, entertainment. Due to the fact that money is no longer a major factor in determine which films are made, as well as the fact that most people were generally well educated, films are now very "highbrow," high-quality films. But in the midst of all this happiness and contentment, humanity cannot help but wonder "where do we go from here?"

Chapter 11

Jan meets again with his brother-in-law, Rupert Boyce. Boyce is preparing a stuffed elephant to be sent to the Overlords, who collect specimens of exotic alien life forms for their museums. Boyce mentions that another scientist, Sullivan, is preparing a sperm whale and a giant squid for the Overlords. This gives Jan an idea. Soon after, he travels down to Sullivan's laboratory, where he asks for the doctor's help in achieving his dream of reaching the stars.

Analysis

In Chapter 9 the reader begins to get some clues as to what the Overlords are really doing on Earth. Now that a utopia has been achieved, their presence almost seems superfluous, although chances are good that society would eventually break down if the Overlords left. But clearly the Overlords have some sort of agenda, one that has something to do with Jean Morrel and her surprising mental powers. It was Jean who "channeled" the information that came out on the Ouija board. The Overlords determine that while she is too old to be a "Prime Contact," someone very close to her will be—as it turns out, her future children.

The next chapter takes a break from the characters and, again, describes the state of Earth society. Again, it is hinted that boredom is beginning to set in, as is a sense of being without purpose. When there is nothing to strive for, what is the point of life? By working harder, more money can be made for luxury items, but this is a hollow pursuit. Without religion and without suffering, life has started to lose its meaning for much of the world. Everything that mankind had hoped to achieve in the last few thousand years—peace, prosperity, and health for every human on the planet—has been accomplished in a hundred years by the Overlords. Quite rightly, humans begin to ask, "where do we go from here?" They suspect that the Overlords know, but the aliens are not telling them what it is.

Arthur C. Clarke wrote several stories that dealt with such utopian societies. In several of them, there is usually some character that decides to rebel against his world, claiming that it has made everyone boring, complacent, and purposeless. In a way, that is what Jan Rodricks is doing: resisting the pleasures of a utopian existence simply because it is a closed system. There is nothing to fear or lose, but there is nothing to look forward to or strive for either. In many of Clarke's stories, humans eventually escape from the "frog pond" of Earth and begin to explore and colonize space. They become, in a way, Overlords themselves. But Childhood's End is unique among Clarke's novels because this is not what happens. Rather than mankind learning to build spaceships and reaching out into space, they are denied all access to space by the Overlords for no apparent reason. While the reasons will be explained later in the story, for the time being people like Jan Rodricks must suffer in a utopia that is, for all its benefits, going nowhere. Clarke's utopian Earth is a somewhat cynical one, but more significantly, it is an artificial one. A utopia as Clarke imagines it in Childhood's End would be virtually impossible without the "divine intervention" of the godlike Overlords, whose powers seem limitless. Of course, the novel still has one great irony: the revelation, at the end of the book, that for all their power, the Overlords are a stagnant race and that humans have a potential far greater than they.

Chapter 12

Sullivan has agreed to help Jan Rodricks with his plan to sneak aboard an Overlord ship. Jan writes a letter to his sister, explaining that due to time dilation at the speed of light, the trip will only seem to take a few months to him, but to her it will seem like many years, and she will probably be long dead when he returns. His plan is to hide himself away inside the sperm whale model that Sullivan is preparing for the Overlords. Inside a little capsule in the whale, Jan will inject himself with a drug that will put him to sleep for six weeks--most of the trip to the Overlords' homeworld. At that point, he will give himself up and, hopefully, get a chance to see the Overlords' planet before he is shipped back to Earth, returning eighty years after he left it.

Chapter 13

Sullivan shows Jan the metal skeletal framework of the sperm whale. Rather than actually capturing and stuffing a sperm whale and a giant squid, the scientists use advanced techniques to create fake but entirely realistic models. A few weeks later, Sullivan stands on Easter Island next to his impressive achievement. He is awaiting the arrival of Karellen to inspect the model, showing a sperm whale and a giant squid locked in combat. Karellen is impressed, but both Sullivan and Jan, who watches from a few hundred yards away, wonder whether Karellen has guessed the secret inside the whale. Karellen makes a comment about the story of Jonah and the Whale, but he does not seem to have guessed the whale's secret. Finally, the time comes for Jan to enter the whale. He climbs in and is locked away inside. Jan checks the systems inside the whale pod, then injects himself with the sleeping drug. He is asleep long before the Overlords' ship goes to light speed.

Chapter 14

Karellen holds a press conference. He first reveals that a human stowaway has made it onto an Overlord supply ship. He provides Jan Rodricks' name, but he will not say how Jan snuck onto the ship. He then moves on to the more important matter of the meeting. Karellen notes that many people have become restless to get into space and are wondering why the Overlords will not allow them to. Karellen assures them it is more for their own good than anything else. He gives the analogy, "what if a Stone Age human found himself in a modern city?" and shows them a holographic projection of their galaxy. With billions of stars and worlds to consider, Karellen says, humanity could not hope to be able to handle them. Karellen says that one of his duties has been to "protect" humans from the "forces that lie among the stars." Someday, humans may colonize all the planets in their solar system, but beyond that they can never go: "the stars are not for man." After this conference, Karellen broods in his ship. He knows that the "golden age" of the Earth is coming to an end and that a future of which humans could not even imagine is approaching.

Analysis

It is difficult to analyze a novel like Childhood's End without admitting its flaws. The narration of the novel works on two levels: first, there is the very broad view, where the perspective is pulled back very far. In this perspective, the narrator describes the great changes that occur on Earth, such as the development of a utopia or the growing restlessness and boredom of mankind. But author Arthur C. Clarke then zooms in to a much tighter perspective in an attempt to illustrate these changes. More often than not, this shift causes problems. Clarke is not a "great novelist" in terms of his style and craft. His ideas are often interesting and his philosophical explorations can be very original, but his writing is often, for lack of a better word, bad. For instance, there is no real relationship between Jan Rodricks finding out where the Overlords' homeworld is and his decision to sneak on to the Overlords' ship. He could have decided to sneak on the ship without ever having attended Rupert Boyce's party. In the scenes where Jan and Dr. Sullivan prepare to sneak Jan into the whale, the narrator tries to playfully cover up the plan rather than simply spelling it out. This would be more effective if the plan wasn't obvious from the minute that Rupert Boyce mentioned that Sullivan was stuffing a sperm whale for transport to the Overlord home world.

Then there is the long letter by Jan to his sister Maia. The purpose of this letter is to explain the nature of the theory of relativity, so the reader can understand why eighty years will pass for Maia while only a few months will pass Jan on the light speed ship. The purpose of this letter is obviously to instruct the reader much more than Maia, and this makes it rather unrealistic; in such an age of utopian enlightenment, it's almost unthinkable that Maia would be unaware of the theory of relativity (indeed, any serious science fiction reader since the 1950s would be well aware of the theory or its effects). The letter is stiff and unrealistic, devoid of any real emotion, and only serves to show just how flat Clarke's characters are. There is a sense that Jan's trip is little more than a plot device, so the reader can see what the Overlords are really like, and perhaps find out what they're doing.

This sense is supported by the fact that Karellen uses it as an excuse to tell humanity that they will never conquer the stars. The reasons he gives—that humanity simply couldn't handle the "forces" of outer space and that humans' little minds simply couldn't comprehend the vastness of it—these reasons are very unconvincing, both to the characters and to the reader. Karellen's comments directly contrast something said earlier in the novel by Stormgren: "...taken one at a time, I don't think [Karellen]'s mental gifts are quite outside the range of human achievement." The reader may reasonably agree with Stormgren's assessment. Karellen's reasons seem to be a poor excuse at best; the Overlords may have been necessary to prevent humanity from destroying itself in a nuclear holocaust, but now they that they have refined human sensibilities, they are only holding humanity back. There turns out to be a reason for the Overlords' behavior, but as Childhood's End progresses, its flaws, both in terms of style and premise, become more and more pronounced.

Chapter 15

George Greggson and Jean Morrel are now married. George has become dissatisfied with his job as a television set designer, and he wants to join New Athens, a special community set up on an island. The couple, now with two kids, decide to visit the island. The community was founded by a man that feared that the Overlords, in their zeal to bring peace and justice to mankind, were "destroying the soul of man." The concept of New Athens is to build an "independent, stable cultural group with its own artistic traditions." The island is mostly self-sufficient, and every member of the island contributes to the society. The hope is that New Athens will help invigorate the arts again, which have stagnated since conflict ended all over the world. The creators of New Athens believed that there is too much entertainment in the world and that individuality and inspiration are dying out. Everyone is "absorbing but not creating." New Athens, George and Jean are told, is intended to reverse that process. People who wish to be a part of the island must pass a number of psychological tests.

The Greggsons take the test and pass, and they soon join the island community. Jean learns the pleasures of actually cooking in a kitchen, while George learns to design sets for plays rather than television shows. Since the island is so small, there are few cars—the main mode of transportation is the bicycle.

Chapter 16

The Greggsons begin to adjust to their new quarters. They buy a golden retriever, who becomes the best friend of their son, Jeffrey. Jeffrey takes to the island fairly quickly, enjoying the freedom to crawl around the cliffs of the island's edge. Their daughter Jennifer is too young to do much other than sleep in her crib (cuna). Jean has lost her interest in the paranormal since the incident at the home of Rupert Boyce. George is becoming busy with his present and future plans.

One day, George comes home and finds that Jeffrey is out on another part of the island with friends. At that moment, a siren sounds. Elsewhere, Jeffrey is alone when the ocean water suddenly begins to roll back. A few hours after the tsunami, Jeffrey is found safe and sound on a piece of coral. His story is unbelievable: he tells his parents that as he was watching the waters ebb (reflujo) away when a voice told him to run. He was running when the water hit, and a giant rock blocked his escape route. The voice told him to close his eyes, and suddenly the rock was gone. The Greggsons are concerned, and they have Jeffrey checked by a psychologist. He seems to think that there's nothing too unusual about the story—just a result of a young boy's imagination. Jean is relieved, but George secretly thinks the Overlords were involved—and wonders why.

Analysis

New Athens represents a last-ditch effort by humanity to stave off the boredom and stagnation that is already beginning to set in. Without space to strive for, now forbidden by the Overlords, mankind is becoming lost in its entertainment. While the individual may work all his or her life to improve him or herself, there seems to be little that can be done to advance the entire race now. However, there seems to be a few flaws in the argument of New Athens's founders. They argue that everyone is absorbing entertainment, but not creating. However, someone must be creating the entertainment; the narrator tells us earlier in the novel that the films of the 2050s are "incomparably highbrow" when compared to those of the 1950s. The proponents of New Athens offer a better explanation when they make the claim that there is nothing left to struggle for. When all the necessities of life are free, and exploration of the final frontier—space—is forbidden, there is indeed nothing to strive for, which might squelch (aplastar) the artistic temperament. Yet New Athens is still a model of peace and prosperity. Its inhabitants are only choosing to live a slightly less convenient lifestyle than the rest of the world. In truth, living on the island is more like choosing to go camping than creating a genuine struggle. At any time, the members of the community are free to leave the island. This is what makes the New Athens community so tragic. However, the island does draw a high concentration of gifted artists, ironically making it the most likely place for the breakthrough that the Overlords are waiting for.

That breakthrough is apparently Jeffrey. While it is unclear exactly who rescued Jeffrey, he has some sort of guardian angel watching over him, whether it be the Overlords or someone (or something) else. However, this is another place where the novel becomes bogged down in rather irrelevant details. The incident with the tsunami does not reveal anything in particular other than the fact that Jeffrey is somehow special. The previous chapter, where New Athens, its history and development was described in such painstaking detail, was also a digression from the main plot: the mysterious agenda of the Overlords and whatever they are waiting for mankind to become.


---

Study Questions

Discuss irony in Childhood's End.
Childhood's End is possibly one of the most blatantly ironic novels of science fiction. The story began with an ironic conceit. The original short story, which was later expanded into Childhood's End, was called "Guardian Angel." The plot of "Guardian Angel" concludes when Karellen reveals himself to the world—and turns out to look exactly like the Devil. The title of the story makes the joke obvious: Clarke thought it would be neat to write a story in which an alien race comes down and helps humans achieve new levels of prosperity and happiness, but it turns out to look exactly like the Devil. In the original short story, that's the end of the joke, except for a small hint that the Overlords fear something "thousands of years in the future"—which may be reference to Armageddon. It seems quite possible that Clarke wrote "Guardian Angel" with nothing more in his mind than to create an amusing, ironic parable based on Christian apocalyptic prophecies and devil- related folklore.
However, when Clarke decided to expand the story into Childhood's End, he chose to extend the Christian metaphor by introducing new allegorical elements such as the Overmind—a kind of "God"—as well as the idea that the Overlords can never achieve the Overmind conversion. This is the second great irony of the book: for all their vast intellectual and technological superiority to humans, the Overlords ultimately envy them, for humans can make an important evolutionary step that is forever closed off to the Overlords.
Identify the protagonist(s) and antagonist(s) of Childhood's End, if any. Explain your answer.
While Arthur C. Clarke is one of the most important science fiction authors of the twentieth century, his skill at writing—particularly in his early novels—is often rather flawed. The flaws are quite common with much science fiction, since science fiction is primarily concerned with ideas, not with stories (though, again, this was more true in the 1950s, when Childhood's End was written, than it is today).
As a result, the characters and plot of Childhood's End are not perfect. The narration jumps wildly from a very broad perspective to a very narrow one, focusing on events that are often completely inconsequential in the broader scheme of the novel. For instance, once Jan Rodricks finds out which star is the Overlords' homeworld, he does nothing with the information, despite his assurance that "knowledge is power."
Protagonists are usually defined as characters that are "dynamic"--that is, they change, or grow, through the course of the novel. While a few of the human characters in Childhood's End can be said to grow somewhat (in particular, Stormgren and Rodricks), neither of them are found throughout the novel, and they don't really "grow" too much. George Greggson and his wife are little more than passive observers, witnesses to the end of mankind. The closest thing to a constant protagonist is Karellen, but as the reader discovers, no one is more static than Karellen. He is defined by the fact that he is undynamic. Childhood's End does not have any true protagonists, with one possible exception: humanity as a whole. The main premise of the book is the idea that humanity, the collection of separate physical individuals, becomes the Overmind, the collective consciousness of pure energy and thought. Humanity itself, considered as a character, undergoes the most dynamic changes of all.
No matter who the protagonist is, there does not seem to be an antagonist, although an argument could be made that the Overlords, by exacting a totalitarian hold on Earth and refusing to allow humans to explore space or paranormal phenomena, serve as antagonists to the human race. But for this to work, one must subscribe to the idea that humanity's assimilation into the Overmind is a bad thing.
Identify the Christian allegorical elements within Childhood's End.
Childhood's End started out as "Guardian Angel," a story that hinged on the ironic idea that aliens in the shape of the Devil would lead mankind to a utopia. In the novel, Clarke broadens this allegorical tale by adding two major features of Christian theology: that of Satan and the rebel's angels being cast out of heaven and the idea of Armageddon. Karellen is Satan, leader of the Overlords, who can never make the great leap and join the Overmind. This is similar to Satan and his rebel angels, who can never again enjoy the Divine Presence of their Creator. Similarly, the end of mankind and the assimilation of the children of mankind into the Overmind, is reminiscent of descriptions of the Rapture and Armageddon. The strong similarities between these ideas may account for the uniqueness of Childhood's End within Clarke's novels: it is the one novel where he sacrificed his scientific ideas in favor of using a more mythologically-based framework.
Suggested Essay Topics

Analyze the character of Karellen. How does he behave toward mankind? Is he sympathetic, or patronizing?

In Childhood's End, Clarke uses two perspectives. One is very wide, where the narrator describes broad events and trends throughout the world. The other is very close, where he describes the behavior of certain characters. Find an example of a broad trend in one of these wide-perspective chapters, and then find a character to does something that represents that trend. (Example: in one chapter, the narrator discusses how the artistic achievements of mankind begin to falter in utopian society. George's joining the New Athens community is an attempt to fight this decline).

Explain, as much as possible, the nature of the Overmind. What is it? What are its motives? How has it behaved in the past? What are its powers, and its limitations?

Karellen tells Stormgren, "All political problems can be solved with the correct use of force." Stormgren counters by pointing out that this sounds like "Might makes right." Is this a reasonable objection? How does Karellen put his theory into practice, and are there any evident flaws when he does so? Give examples.

Childhood's End seems to claim that any given race has one of two choices: evolutionary stagnation, like the Overlords, or joining the Overmind. Does the novel suggest there are any other alternatives?